Using following context:

the problematic updates. 3.1 W ARMUP AS VARIANCE REDUCTION In this section, we design a set of controlled experiments to verify our hypothesis. Particularly, we design two variants of Adam that reducing the variance of the adaptive learning rate: Adam-2k and Adam-eps. We compare them to vanilla Adam with and without warmup on the IWSLT’14 German to English translation dataset (Cettolo et al., 2014). In order to reduce the variance of the adaptive learning rate (ψ(.)), Adam-2k only updatesψ(.) in the ﬁrst two thousand iterations, while the momentum ( φ(.)) and parameters ( θ) are ﬁxed 3; other than this, it follows the original Adam algorithm. To make comparison with other methods, its iterations are indexed from -1999 instead of 1. In Figure 1, we observe that, after getting these additional two thousand samples for estimating the adaptive learning rate, Adam-2k avoids the convergence problem of the vanilla-Adam. Also, comparing Figure 2 and Figure 3, getting large enough samples prevents the gradient distribution from being distorted. These observations verify our hypothesis that the lack of sufﬁcient data samples in the early stage is the root cause of the convergence issue. 2The mean zero normal assumption is valid at the beginning of the training, since weights are sampled from normal distributions with mean zero (Balduzzi et al., 2017), further analysis is conducted in Section 5.3. 3Different from Gotmare et al. (2019), all parameters and ﬁrst moments are frozen in the ﬁrst 2000 iterations. 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 Another straightforward way to reduce

in Figure 3). However, as in Figure 1, it produces a much worse performance comparing to Adam-2k and Adam-warmup. We conjecture that this is because large ϵ induces a large bias into the adaptive learning rate and slows down the optimization process. Thus, we need a more principled and rigorous way to con- trol the variance of the adaptive learning rate. In the next subsection, we will present a theoretical analysis of the variance of the adaptive learning rate. 3.2 A NALYSIS OF ADAPTIVE LEARNING RATE VARIANCE As mentioned before, Adam uses the exponential moving average to calculate the adaptive learning rate. For gradients {g1,··· ,gt}, their exponential moving average has a larger variance than their simple average. Also, in the early stage ( t is small), the difference of the exponential weights of {g1,··· ,gt}is relatively small (up to 1 −βt−1 2 ). Therefore, for ease of analysis, we approximate the distribution of the exponential moving average as the distribution of the simple average (Nau, 2014), i.e., p(ψ(.)) = p( √ 1−βt 2 (1−β2) ∑t i=1 βt−i 2 g2 i ) ≈p( √ t∑t i=1 g2 i ). Since gi ∼N (0,σ2), we have t∑t i=1 g2 i ∼Scale-inv-X2(t, 1 σ2 ). Therefore, we assume 1−βt 2 (1−β2) ∑t i=1 βt−i 2 g2 i also subjects to a scaled inverse chi-square distribution with ρdegrees of freedom (further analysis on this approximation is conducted in Section 5.3). Based on this assumption, we can calculate Var[ψ2(.)] and the PDF of ψ2(.). Now, we proceed to the analysis

update rule to a Lp norm based update rule. Such variants become numerically unstable for large p. However, in the special case where we let p →∞, a surprisingly simple and stable algorithm emerges; see algorithm 2. We’ll now derive the algorithm. Let, in case of the Lp norm, the stepsize at time tbe inversely proportional to v1/p t , where: vt = βp 2 vt−1 + (1 −βp 2 )|gt|p (6) = (1 −βp 2 ) t∑ i=1 βp(t−i) 2 ·|gi|p (7) 8 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015 Algorithm 2: AdaMax, a variant of Adam based on the inﬁnity norm. See section 7.1 for details. Good default settings for the tested machine learning problems are α = 0 .002, β1 = 0 .9 and β2 = 0.999. With βt 1 we denote β1 to the power t. Here, (α/(1 −βt 1)) is the learning rate with the bias-correction term for the ﬁrst moment. All operations on vectors are element-wise. Require: α: Stepsize Require: β1,β2 ∈[0,1): Exponential decay rates Require: f(θ): Stochastic objective function with parameters θ Require: θ0: Initial parameter vector m0 ←0 (Initialize 1st moment vector) u0 ←0 (Initialize the exponentially weighted inﬁnity norm) t←0 (Initialize timestep) while θt not converged do t←t+ 1 gt ←∇θft(θt−1) (Get gradients w.r.t. stochastic objective at timestep t) mt ←β1 ·mt−1 + (1 −β1) ·gt (Update biased ﬁrst moment estimate) ut ←max(β2 ·ut−1,|gt|) (Update the exponentially weighted inﬁnity norm) θt ←θt−1 −(α/(1 −βt 1)) ·mt/ut (Update parameters) end while return θt (Resulting parameters) Note that

Answer on query: 
how adam works???